Testing for a third time on July the 19th.
Okay, doing a sound check.
This is July the 19th, and I have the pleasure and honor of chatting today with Benton Kokenauer, the dean of business.
To begin with, to introduce yourself to someone that might read this or listen to it in the years in the future.
Describe growing up, where, where'd you go to high school, parents' occupation, and so forth.
Introduce yourself to this tape, please.
Sure.
I'm a native Texan.
I was born, I lived in the Lubbock area until I was 13.
Then we moved to the cultural center in north central Texas, Wichita Falls.
My parents are business people.
My dad was in the
various businesses in Wichita Falls.
Managed a large shopping center there and my mother worked for an oil distributor.
Went to finished high school in Wichita Falls.
went to the University of Oklahoma for two years, then transferred to the University of Texas, and got an undergraduate degree, and was commissioned in the Army, and served for two years, then went to work for GE, and worked for GE for a little over five years, and took a leave of absence, and came back to the University of Texas, and entered the PhD program, actually picked up a master's degree en route,
Got my master's in business administration.
My undergraduate degree was in finance and accounting.
Got my MBA and PhD in marketing.
Okay, then first academics.
Okay, first academic, actually I stayed on the University of Texas for a year on the faculty that had some people go and leave and asked me to stay and then I took a faculty appointment at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles and was there three years and
Then accepted an offer at the University of Houston and was there 13 years and came from there to Texas A&M.
Don't I remember A&M trying to recruit you before you came up here?
Well, I think, you know, we had had some discussions off and on for a while and then, of course, I knew some of the people here and then
Also, as an administrator at the University of Houston, I recall that you and I met at a couple of meetings, as I recall.
And, of course, at the University of Houston, I was dean of the business school for nine years and then was the executive vice president and provost there for two and a half years before coming to A&M.
All right.
And you came to A&M what year?
1987, July of 87.
And what was it that attracted you here?
Why A&M?
Well, by the time I came to A&M, you know, its future direction was clearly set.
I have a lot of admiration for the people that helped change the very fabric of this university.
And having seen it from something of a distance, it really was dramatic.
what had happened.
You know, frankly, A&M was not a university that I probably would have given much thought to at the time that I got my PhD and was really looking for career opportunities, but by
certainly by the the mid 80s it was clear to everyone that this was a university that was uh had made some really remarkable changes and and what its aspiration levels were and and the role that it saw itself playing in the future and and and really was establishing itself uh
as a flagship university.
Now obviously by designation the Permanent University Fund, by definition it may have been a flagship university, but it had changed its philosophy and its approach to fulfill that legacy.
In business, what were some of the hallmarks of that progress before you came?
Well, certainly there were, there was a core of really highly competent faculty, and many of those, to the credit of the institution, had come here very early in their career and developed into outstanding faculty.
I mean, people like Don Hellriegel, Bob Strausser, and
later of people like Lynn Berry and really I could name any number of people that I knew well had a lot of respect for and certainly it was a lot of
raw material and still not fully fulfilled potential was in place.
But it was a very attractive situation.
I felt like from a career standpoint and that it was clearly a university committed to becoming a nationally leading university.
The regents expressed really strong support to me personally that they wanted a strong business program.
The university administration indicated that they were pleased at the development of the business programs, but wanted us to really move them into the forefront.
And that was an exciting potential.
As you were considering
Did some regents, did you chat with some regents?
I did.
Some were involved in the search process.
Also talked to some of the external people involved with the college, and then, of course, had an opportunity to talk to the administration.
Who was?
Vandiver was president, and Frank was... I was...
Very impressed with the sincerity that he conveyed and that he thought that, you know, it was clearly an area that he didn't have much personal experience or involvement in, but that he felt like it was important to the future of Texas A&M.
As his first doctoral student, I know him fairly well.
Who was the, I guess then wasn't yet called provost, who was the chief academic officer?
Chief academic officer was Donald McDonnell.
And he came out of business, didn't he?
No, he was an engineer.
Oh, that's right, that's right.
Of course, I had known Bill Mobley for a number of years.
Bill was the deputy chancellor.
at the time and it was the former business school dean and Bill was really very influential and he was one time just in passing I had mentioned to Bill at that time he had just taken the deputy chancellor and I was the the provost at the University of Houston I had mentioned to Bill that really of the jobs I'd had that I'd really decided I was not
that interest in being a university president.
Jobs I had, I really thought the most fun job was being a business school dean.
And so when this job opened up and Bill moved, he called one day and said, how serious were you about that?
And it kind of started from there.
All right, now this is the only question I'm going to ask about money.
What was the beginning salary?
The beginning salary, as I recall, I think it was $125,000.
How competitive was that in the real world then?
At the time, it was competitive.
You know, certainly salaries have gone up quite a bit since then.
And certainly compared to the dean's jobs at A&M, I felt good about it.
I think that, you know, I did not feel like I was being overpaid.
I don't guess we ever do.
But I felt like that they were making a pretty clear signal that it was something that they placed importance in and that they were interested in having me come here.
Did anyone give you a kind of guidance, advice, counsel?
Did they set some goals for you?
Well, it probably helped that I'd had so much administrative experience by then and was at that time, you know, 48 years old and been an administrator since pretty early as well as having the experience with GE, which was an incredibly useful experience.
But, you know, I think one of the strengths that I have is that
uh i i try to get advice anywhere i can uh you know you always have the the right to evaluate it and accept it or not accept it but uh you know i i had the benefit of a lot of valuable input bill mobley was was certainly very helpful don hellriegel who
I really think a lot of personally had been the interim dean and was very helpful in kind of giving me a good feel for the situation.
But, you know, some of the regents provided some insights just on a personal basis.
Who were they?
Which regents?
Well, you know, John Mobley and Lowry Mays.
Certainly I got to know
very early on, and Royce Weisenbaker was, you know,
Royce apparently either liked you or didn't like you, and there was not much in between.
And I've always felt very fortunate that, for whatever reason, he was very generous with me in terms of the relationship that we had.
When you arrived, describe the college as you found it.
Where was it?
What was there?
Yeah, the college was one of the tenants in the blocker building.
Frankly, coming in the blocker building was fairly unimpressive for me.
It certainly was not a facility that I thought placed us very well with some of the peer schools or some of the aspiration level schools.
that we had and certainly was not very efficient space for a college-like business.
But what I found interesting was that people had been around a number of years thought Blocker was a great step up from what they had previously had.
So I considered it a big step for us when we were able to make the case for new facilities as some time went on, because I thought it was an important step for the business program.
And what did you find as you looked at the faculty and the department heads and so forth?
I was really, very pleasantly surprised in that regard.
I thought that there was a consistently quality faculty.
There were some areas I thought we needed to strengthen.
Such as?
Yeah, and one of the things that I did, and it's kind of my style, was to try to lay out some areas and get some common agreement on those of areas that
that we really needed to focus some special attention on.
And at that time, management information systems, international business, and strategic management.
That if we were going to be a top 50 ranked business program, then those were areas that clearly we had to have some demonstrated
national level.
About where did A&M rank then?
Well, A&M was really better than its ranking, but at that time essentially A&M didn't rank at all.
At the time there were certainly fewer rankings than there are now, but it was disappointing that it
When we inquired of U.S.
News why we hadn't emerged in our top 50 to discover we weren't even in the set of schools being considered to be in the top 50.
Who else in Texas was considered at that point?
Well, at that time, the only consistent school was the University of Texas at Austin.
There were a few surveys that SMU might show up on and a few that Rice's name might appear, but the University of Texas was the only one consistently ranked.
And we concluded that basically we had to do a better job of communicating where we were.
And we really put a lot of effort into that to make sure that people understood what was going on with A&M.
In fact, Bill Mobley had done a survey when he was dean, which he quite appropriately just filed away after he got the results of it, that discovered that even in the state of Texas that there weren't
a large number or proportion of the population that didn't even know we offered an MBA program at A&M.
And, you know, it was clear that we had a far better program and far better capabilities than what was perceived.
And so we put a major effort into communications.
And I think it's paid off very well.
When you arrived, were there any fires that you had to put out immediately?
Any problems that had to be solved?
Well, there were some resource issues, but those are fairly typical.
No, there weren't.
And to put it in a context, for example, there are a lot of situations where you go in and at that time there were some areas in some business schools around the country, like business communications, that essentially were not on the cutting edge and that
where you'd really have to eliminate departments and so forth.
And really much of that had already been done.
I was very fortunate in that regard.
The college had had good leadership, Bill Mobley and Bill Muse and John Pearson before that.
And, you know, so there weren't any of these
lingering issues that occupy a lot of time and detract you from a focus.
So we were able to get right down to business and that was very helpful for me and very helpful for the college.
So I'm hearing you say there was nothing you had to go and undo and get back to running.
It was just turn the engine up to a higher speed and
And really lay out some specific kinds of targets to get the conversations and the college focused on those so that we could come to a consensus, this is where we want to head.
And really that was not that difficult to do.
I think people were ready.
Let's get going.
And in terms of organization of the college by departments and so forth, how did you find that?
I think for the most part, it's fairly traditional and fairly functional.
And we did a little tweaking on it, but very little.
Very little was necessary.
We, you know, for example, in accounting, we added a little bit of an in-house systems component in accounting because the discipline was moving that way.
But for the most part, the departments were a very workable organization, and we had, for the most part, good leadership in the departments in terms of the department heads.
Who were the best department heads when you arrived?
Well, you know, I would just mention some that I thought were particularly good, and one's still department head at Jim Benjamin at accounting.
Jim, we kid him that he obviously was underage when he took the job because he's been department head for like 18 years, and he's still a relatively young person.
But he's one of those rare people that seems to maintain enthusiasm and a renewed focus and strategic sense and the county department has done a very good job.
and maintaining a very positive approach.
And he's done very well.
Don Hellrigal was head of the management department after him.
Mike hit, and they were both as outstanding scholars and outstanding people.
So there was a lot of strong leadership.
In the various specific areas compared to other institutions at that time, where did A&M rank in business in those majors?
Where did we rank best?
Yeah, I think probably our highest visibility externally was in management and marketing in terms of the academic.
Our highest visibility in the professional community was accounting.
I think there were pockets of other areas.
We were strong in banking.
but relatively weak in investments in corporate finance, and I think everybody agreed we needed to make an effort there.
And I think everybody sensed that we had a good beginning but had a lot of work to do in the management information systems area, this because it was growing so much in importance.
And frankly, we were starting at almost ground zero in the international business area.
And it's really remarkable how much we progressed in that area.
And I give credit to people like Carrie Cooper.
who Kerry Cooper was a distinguished scholar in finance but has agreed to kind of take a mission to bring this college where it needed to be in international business and really single-handedly and I support him every way I could but I give him a lot of the credit for what we've done in that area because he was starting
I was disappointed where we were in that area.
In terms of the organization by departments and so forth, were there any changes that you wanted to make?
No, you know, we had some questions we had to answer.
Really, like I'll go to the international.
Were we going to some business schools create a separate department international?
We concluded that was not the best thing to do, that we were better off having scholars grounded in the basic disciplines, but with an orientation toward
toward international.
We really had to decide that we want to disperse our technology component across all departments or focus it more.
We concluded we wanted to focus it more.
But, you know, those are the sort of ongoing questions and really we were structured such with a small number of departments that were large enough and flexible enough to accommodate just about anything we wanted to do in that structure.
As you are being recruited, were you assured that there would be receptivity to your new ideas?
Yeah, I never
once doubted that as long as we were reasonable in our expectations and thoughtful in our request, that we would get a fair hearing.
And I must say that I, you know, there were times that obviously we disagreed with the decisions and times that we thought we needed more and could have used more.
but i certainly never felt like that we we got anything less than a fair hearing and and what i would consider very positive support i just you know it's a lot of people
can't make that that statement in a lot of university settings and of course it was also a time that was it was a very fortunate time in the history of the state and history of this university there was
considerable increase in the puff monies at that time.
You know, so it was a wonderful time to be coming, don't you know?
In those early interviews, visits, and then your early experiences here, did anybody tease you about the fact that you had gone to other institutions and not this one?
Yeah, I you know even Even some of the I can't remember the specific Regents, but you know some of the Regents kidded me about my University of Texas heritage and
Coming from the University of Houston wasn't much of a problem.
The three degrees from the University of Texas was where the real problem was.
And, you know, fortunately, I think
By that stage of the institutionals' development, those all fell in the category of this good humor rather than anybody having any serious concerns about it.
And it really helped a lot then.
When we moved here, my daughter was a junior in high school and my son was a freshman in high school.
And they both decided, this fell in love with A&M, decided they would go to school here.
And in fact, they both ended up getting master's degrees here.
Now that I have four degrees from A&M in my family, a lot of my checkered background taint has been removed.
One I love to tell on myself, one time I was doing the muster speech in Fort Worth.
Old man interrupted my speech.
He said, you didn't go to A&M.
What kind of Aggie are you?
I said, sir, I'm an Aggie by choice.
He stood back up and said, what the hell does that mean?
I said, well, when I first got employed at A&M, I didn't have much of a choice.
This was the best job.
But since then, I've had a few opportunities to go elsewhere, but I've decided that I want to stay at A&M, at least for the present.
And then on a guess, I said, and I understood that some people didn't have a choice as to where they went to school.
He jumped back up and he said, you're darn right.
In the fall of 1927, my dad called me in the front room of our farmhouse up near Jacksboro, and he said, son, you can stay here this fall and pick cotton, or you can go to College Station, and maybe they'll straighten you out.
I didn't have a choice.
That's right.
And I've used that one a few times, and I'll see a few people nod their heads.
You know, it's my observation that
farmer students and groups like that that
But as long as you display that you're really committed to this institution, that they don't much care where you went to school at that point as long as they think that you really are committed to making A&M better.
All right, share some of your first experiences with Aggie students, former students, politicians, and so forth.
Well, I'll tell a story on myself, and this is one of the few kind of negative things that happened in those first few years, although I really find it humorous now to look back on it, but we had actually, the head of our finance department, Gary Trennepole, who was really a
great asset for our college and has now gone on to be dean at another university.
But Gary, before I got here, I had already arranged for T. Boone Pickens to make a presentation on campus.
And T. Boone was in the news everywhere at that time on the cover of Business Journal.
He was certainly an appropriate person to have here.
And Gary had a program in the department that for a big-name speaker, we'd give them sort of an award.
You know, it wasn't any major event, but...
And so I got a, this was going to happen in November, and I got a call in about October from a reporter for the Houston Chronicle saying that, was I aware that a prominent
former student in Houston was a was an arch enemy of T. Boone Pickens and that that he was very upset and that that we were having him there and speaking to the students and then they had insult the injury going to give him some kind of little war just a plaque and
In fact, the reporter said, in fact, Mr. X said that that new business school dean up there must be a liberal son of a bitch.
And I told the reporter, you know, she said, what do you think about that?
I said, well, you know, first of all, anybody who's as prominent a former student as this has done much for the university.
We're concerned when they're concerned.
I'd be glad to talk to him about it but basically we feel like that one of our roles is to get people that are in the news here and
And I said, you know, the only thing I'm troubled by is the liberal son of a bitch that I've never had anybody call me a liberal before.
So apparently she relayed that back to him and he thought that was kind of funny and I've never had any other problems since then with him.
So in fact, I have a fine relationship with him.
All right, what about examples of the positive of interest and dedication?
Yeah, well I think anybody,
is struck even today by the quality of our undergraduate students.
They're exceptional by most any standards.
And fortunately that hasn't changed and maybe I've just gotten more used to it, but it was really striking I think when I came here.
their involvement with the university, their commitment to do the best they can, the leadership opportunities.
We hear a lot about the core at A&M, but I'm telling you, there aren't many business schools in the country where
where the student leadership plans parents weekend, plans a career fair that the corporate world tells us the best that they go to, and it's really all the students.
I mean, they work on it all year long.
And, you know, you just don't see that, and certainly I had not experienced it in places that I had been.
So you couldn't keep from being very positively struck by that.
And then the A&M network,
I mean that's a very real thing and I've seen it with my own kids that when they go to a new place new city to work and so forth within a month there's generally some kind of reception of former students in town they meet people and and and then you know the first time that you attend some of the
the traditional ceremonies uh like muster and silver tabs is this i mean that's a will make an impact on anybody and you think this is a very exceptional kind of educational environment and and i've always been